QEMU Emulation of Freescale M5208EVB Evaluation Board
-----------------------------------------------------

The QEMU emulator has machine support for the M52087EVB board and M5208
ColdFire CPU. You will need at least qemu version 2.4 or newer to run
modern versions of the Linux kernel (such as a 4.x kernel).

The original Freescale M5208EVB development board comes with 32MB SDRAM,
and has an internal FEC ethernet device. The default uClinux configuration
includes an ethernet driver for this device.


BOOTING
-------

QEMU boots an ELF object, normally we would just use the generated kernel
image file, vmlinux. Problem is that this doesn't normally contain our
root filesystem - and we won't have a fully booting and working system
without that.

The default uClinux-dist build process will generate an ELF file that
contains both the kernel and the romfs filesystem. But unfortunately this
is a rather special ELF file, and when supplied to QEMU it still won't load
the romfs filesystem section (it is not in an ELF segment). You would run it
like this:

    qemu-system-m68k -nographic -machine mcf5208evb -kernel images/image.elf

The console acts as the first serial port in this setup, and you should
get all the usual boot messages coming out. At least up to trying to mount
the root filesystem.


BOOTING WITH GDB
----------------

One reasonably simple method to get past this is to get gdb to help us, by
loading the root romfs filesystem. To do this firstly run:

    qemu-system-m68k -s -S -nographic -machine mcf5208evb -kernel images/image.elf

This starts up QEMU, but doesn't start executing the image yet. It waits for
gdb to connect and give it commands.

Then you can connect with m68k-linux-gdb using "target remote localhost:1234"
command. Normal gdb debugging then works from here. So a sequence like this:

    target remote localhost:1234
    load images/image.elf
    c

Will get you a fully running system that boots up to a shell.

Note that to break into the qemu command console you type CTRL-a followed
by 'c'. It has lots of online help, just type 'help'.


AN ALTERNATE METHOD OF BOOTING
------------------------------

We can actually do a single boot through QEMU without needing gdb if we
modify our kernel and build it slightly differently. Firstly build the
uClinux-dist with a M5208EVB target. Then reconfigure the kernel with the
following:

    CONFIG_BLK_DEV_INITRD=y
    CONFIG_INITRAMFS_SOURCE="uClinux-dist/romfs"

Note that you will probably need the full absolute path to the romfs
directory.

Now we need a couple of changes to the romfs as well before we rebuild the
kernel with these. Follow these steps:

1. cd uClinux-dist/romfs
   ln -s bin/init init
2. cd dev
   for each device file, make the real corresponding device node (as root)

Now you can rebuild the kernel. This will build the romfs file tree as the
root filesystem into the kernel image itself. 

To run it we now simply use:

    qemu-system-m68k -nographic -machine mcf5208evb -kernel linux/vmlinux


NETWORKING
----------

Qemu emulates the FEC ethernet hardware of the M5208EVB board. By default
this will be probed and initialized on boot. The default slirp configuration
of qemu will work, and if you run a dhcp client then you will get an address
of 10.0.2.15. You can access host services through address 10.0.2.2.

